                               NANTUCKET
                                WINDOWS

                                  BY

                        Edwina Stanton Babcock

                               Author of
           “Greek Wayfarers,” “The Flying Parliament,” etc.

                     The Inquirer and Mirror Press
                        Nantucket Island, Mass.
                                 1924


                           Copyright, 1924,
                        Edwina Stanton Babcock




                        TO ANNIE BARKER FOLGER


 By whose fireside an Off-Islander first learned to love the charm and
                    grace of Nantucket hospitality

          Appreciation is expressed to The National Magazine,
            the Nantucket Historical Society Bulletin, the
                  Nantucket Inquirer and Mirror, and
                  other publications, for permission
                    to reprint some of these verses




CONTENTS


                                                                    Page

Nantucket Windows                                                      9

Dock Drama                                                            10

Ghost House                                                           11

Song of Scarlet                                                       14

Path Maker (to Maria Mitchell)                                        15

Prophecy Made Going “Down Along”                                      16

Coast Yarn                                                            17

Bouncing Bet                                                          19

To the “Nineties”                                                     21

Structures                                                            23

Psychoscience                                                         25

Beacon Lights                                                         26

Wheel                                                                 27

Nantucketer in France                                                 29

Fishing on Steamboat Wharf                                            31

The Wallace Daisy Field                                               33

Youth and the Old Mill                                                34

Scissors Grinder                                                      39

Whispers                                                              41

Not the Gift but the Giver                                            43

The Ball                                                              44

The Town Clock Gives Advice to The Tourist                            46

Cup                                                                   50

To Abram Quary (The Last Indian on Nantucket)                         51

3 A. M.                                                               53

On the Jetty                                                          54

Windrow                                                               55

The Swimmer                                                           56

In the Antique Shop                                                   57

The Cardinal Flower                                                   58

Wild Bird                                                             59

Sabatia Pond                                                          61

The Lost Dryad                                                        62

Pattran                                                               64

Roof Tree                                                             65

Evening at Franklin Valley Farm                                       66

Vision                                                                69

Lost Beauty                                                           70

The Branch of Strange Berries
(An Old Man tells a Story to some Boys)                               71

From a Window                                                         76

Responsible                                                           77

Tree Worship                                                          79

Another Chance                                                        81

Dark Minstrels                                                        83

The People of Today to the Clergy of Today                            84

Protagonist                                                           85

Signal Fires                                                          86

Martyr                                                                87

Ballad of the Thorn Tree                                              88

Balloons on the Beach                                                 89

They Pass                                                             90

On the Beach                                                          91

Saul’s Hills                                                          92

Sea Measure                                                          111

In An Old Burying Ground                                             112

Christmas Eve on Nantucket                                           114

Song of the Lightships (A Landlubber’s Chantey)                      116

September Noon                                                       118

Main Street by Moonlight                                             119

Psalm of Imagined Hunger                                             121

The Moon Canoe                                                       123

Deprecation                                                          124




NANTUCKET WINDOWS


    Out on the night they glimmer, Island houses,
    Casements of orange lustre on the moors;
    Dune-hidden panes where winter sea carouses
    Shine on the roads that wind past farmhouse doors.

    The Island windows gleam, and all the sorrow
    Of human life is lanterned into Dream;
    The fishers’ huts are splashed, the grey shacks borrow
    Red from the sun and weltered moonlight gleam.

    Out on the dark, gold patches on the stable,
    Light-stippled wharves; ruby and malachite;
    Sharp, slanting roofs with witchlike peak and gable,
    Plaqued in warm squares of ruddy window light.

    Thin blocks of amber in the misty weather,
    Oblongs of white translucence on the down;
    Dim, tawny lights beyond pine hidden heather,
    Clear coastward lights fringing the steepled town.

    The grey owl flaps across the heaving hollow,
    The chimneyed house sinks in the commons’ wave;
    The cottage lights a hundred starlights follow,
    The Island windows shine ... the road is brave!




DOCK DRAMA


    Limp in his chair atilt against a shack
    An old man broods o’er newspaper and smoke
    Where shingle-quilted pent roofs back to back
    Checker from grey of ash to black of coke;
    Dim squares of window, opal-paned, baroque,
    Waver on water, pearling it to deep
    Weedwafted droop of shifting shadow cloak
    Where swirls of silver imagery sweep.
    Slow ribboning to the surface serpent rings
    Of mast reflections quiver into grey
    Upon the incoming tide that softly brings
    One high-peaked sail along the buoyant way
    Where questing water tentatively steals
    Fingering mossy spiles and undulant keels.

    The steam boat dock’s a stage where nightly speak
    The actors in some ribald skit of Trade
    Here serried barrels screen a jester’s freak
    And piles of trunks made pirate ambuscade.
    Red lanterns slackly swung and lights of jade
    Accent accordions’ pert canzonette;
    Or furry trawls along the string piece laid
    Trip oil-skinned fisherman’s hulking silhouette.
    A massive barge like enigmatic tomb
    Toward a sea-scented land of dark drifts down;
    Dim on the East the sandy headlands loom
    Till dawn rings up green trees and steepled town.
    Then like applause in broken scattering sound
    The motor boats speed to the clamming ground.




GHOST HOUSE.


    I had always felt contented about that ghost,
    There in her vine-shrouded house aside of the road;
    I knew that the rag-stuffed panes were her special boast,
    That she liked the tumble-down chimney of her abode;
    She liked that old hat that hung in the tree in the lane,
    And the scarecrow leaves that dribbled around in the rain;
    The ivy that muffled the sills, a ghost would adore,
    And she revelled in cobwebs the twisted staircase wore.

    “The dear, mild thing,” I thought, “she’s the only one
    In this glittering, piece-work world that can run a home;
    No wonder the birds to her leaf-hung windows come,
    No wonder the black mole tunnels the garden loam;
    And there is revelry under her knotted boards
    Where wild kittens hide and the grey squirrels rattle their hoards.”

    But some eager, figeting, worldlings came one day,
    Moved into the house on a heavenly morning in May;
    Of course the ghost could do nothing but move away....
    Lord, the cutting and hammering, planing and scrubbing and suds,
    Lord, the paint and the polish, the grates and the curtains and duds!

    The new-new beds, the cleanness and trimness and all,
    I looked for the ghost in the mirror that shone in the hall;
    I looked for her round the curve of the varnished stair,
    I searched and called for her, wistfully, everywhere....

    “And what will you do, dear ghost,” was my whispered cry,
    “And where will you live your shadowed revery?
    Where do ghosts go when no longer they have a home,
    Do they pile their effects in a van and begin to roam?
    Shall you take to a haystack or sleep in the church’s dome?”

    Whether she heard me and thought it could not be true,
    Or guessed that she might not trust me, the ghost made no ado;
    Though the pale grey thing may really have cared that I knew,
    At all events, she moved ... and her shadowy store
    Of belongings exists for the world no more....

    That house by the road, more correct, I think, than most,
    Has lost its chief charm.... It no longer has a ghost.




SONG OF SCARLET.


    The black-alder berries are thick this year,
    (It’s going to be cold);
    Their scarlet trinkets, their necklaces bold
    Hang on the shivering wind-swept year,
    (It’s going to be cold).

    Now, the Commons are bare and the leaves whirl around,
    (It’s going to be cold);
    Like little brown sparrows flicked over the around
    (It’s going to be cold);
    But the black alder-berries like rubies embeaded
    String out on the heath where the milkweed has seeded,
    (It’s going to be cold).

    Now the wind feels the blind and the roads look severe,
    (It’s going to be cold);
    And the locust tree’s horned pods rattle and shake,
    And the small bony branches grow brittle and break ...
    But vitality lingers in reindeer moss,
    And near the holm holly the thorn-berries toss,
    The bright alder-berries gleam saucy and bold,
    Pile up your wood-fires--who cares if it’s cold?




PATHMAKER

(To Maria Mitchell)


    In those eyes, dark as pools, the morning star
    Must have lain long; on that calm breadth of brow
    Must have been set some nobleness of vow
    To distance and to space and all things far.
    A little narrow street enshrines her now,
    But through the world her planet pathways are
    Blazed with her name; the constellate gates un-pbar
    To those who, following, her star-cairns know.
    Woman, who walked with Science to mark the lights
    Along dark ways, thy luminous steps are dim;
    Rapt on ethereal roads of satellites:
    Art gazing still through space beyond the brim
    Of sparkling nebula meadows to the nights
    Of some New Radiance o’er still farther Rim?




PROPHECY MADE GOING “DOWN ALONG.”


    Don’t tell, but I think there’s a miracle today;
    The Old North Church is full of Western light,
    And the bush near by is afire; very bright
    Shine the windows in the tower, for the last half hour
    Some starlings have ranged there whistling and calling,
    The barometer is falling,
    It’s Underground Moon this week, you know;
    (Don’t tell anybody I said so,
    But I think there’s a miracle today.)
    Somewhere on the Island something’s going to happen;
    Don’t ask me, I don’t know anything about it.
    Whatever I say I’d just as lief shout it,
    (But there’s going to be a miracle today!)
    If there’s any pass at all a-going your way,
    Better say
    (There’s going to be a miracle today.)
    Don’t tell them who said so--they wouldn’t like it, hey?
    (But there’s going to be a miracle today!)
    I know it for sure, for I’ve stood for one hour
    Watching those starlings in the North Church Tower.
    So if you want a gam,
    It’s sure I am
    That there’s going to be a miracle today.
    So that’s the drift,
    Though maybe they’ll be miffed--
    “He hasn’t got the run of it,” they’ll say,
    But--there’s going to be a miracle today!




COAST YARN.


    Skies pebbled with stars,
    Sea, breathing like a sleeping animal,
    Wind nuzzling wet shagginess of moors.
    The coarse bright strains of an accordion,
    Perversely stretched and shrunken
    Against a wall of dark.

    Brown faces, high cheekbones,
    Polyglot sea-words;
    A cold, dark swiftness;
    Hardness of diligence
    For shrewd, tight-fisted gain.

    The Cranberry Pickers dance gravely
    In squalid shacks on the moors,
    And the greasy bottles pass
    From old lips to young;
    Rough doorways blurt out light;
    White teeth, dark eyes shine.

    There is chattering wharf talk
    And garbled dock yard French;
    Clamdiggers, Scallopers,
    Fondle their dirty rolls
    Of smoky dollar bills
    And stride in booted ease.

    Out of the moorland night
    She, saucily, slips in,
    Thistledown on her hair;
    Little, slim, ear-ringed, scarlet-bloused,
    Her feet and impertinent breasts four mischievous mongrel words
    In a universal language;
    Her mouth gleams like berries,
    Swamp-light in her eyes--

    Someone clasps, someone curses--
    Then screams; a knife....
    The sea, like an animal panting;
    The sands, scared and white,
    Broken barrels of cranberries
    Strewn like unholy rosaries;
    A man, stripped and bleeding,
    Thrown overboard at midnight
    Where the tide runs strong.

    On a small brown neck
    A long gold chain
    To match new earrings!




BOUNCING BET.


    Sauntering narrow lanes
    Led by the weather vanes
    See beneath narrow panes
    Nantucket gardens
    Where little fruit trees lean
    On old walls grey and green
    Dappling ivies screen
    Nantucket Gardens.

    All that is best and fair
    Like old scent lingers there
    Shrubs, herbs and ramblers share
    The sweet disorders;
    Tall tapered holly hocks
    Foxglove and purple phlox
    Demure mints, frilly stocks
    Spike the box borders.

    Yet--past the rose hung doors
    Called by the tangled moors
    Bouncing Bet left them.
    On new strange roadways bound
    Was the career she found
    When she bereft them.

    Ragged pink wilful thing--
    You had to have your fling
    With weeds to roister
    You could not breathe the air
    Of mignonette, nor care
    For sweet peas cloister.

    Only, these have a name
    Theirs is the garden fame
    They are traditioned;
    Out on the dusty ways
    Bouncing Bet weary strays
    Quite ill-conditioned.

    Yet I have heard the cry
    Go up from passers-by,
    Young, therefore tragic
    _Escaped_--the little word
    To them is not absurd
    They know its magic!

    Therefore dear Bouncing Bet
    You may have honor yet
    Yours may be winning
    But in your saucy pride
    Though you would not abide
    Gates, gardens, walls, beside;
    Were your beginning.




TO THE NINETIES.


    On Sundays when the church bells ring
    Their island-towered summoning
    I see the Nineties go
    Gravely around the narrow cornered way
    As they have gone for many a changing day
    Steady and slow.

    At twilight before window lights are lit
    I see them, whitehaired, backward musing, sit
    Beside their narrow pane
    And then to me who wander through the streets
    The new life with their olden living meets
    And they are young again.

    And always, by the great hearth’s roaring fire
    Or in the spring-lit street, or by the door
    I hear their sober speech, with them live o’er
    Old days, see the stiff backs that bow
    Under the life so hard upon them now;
    Yet frugal, busy, gathering up the Past
    For memories that serve them to the last
    Binding their faggots slow
    Of what they know.

    If e’er the turbulent world can settle down to live
    If e’er we learn to suffer and forgive
    To work hard with few pleasures and great faiths
    We shall invoke these tottering, smiling wraiths
    And we shall smile and whisper softly “true
    It was the Old, who knew.”

     Note. One year when summer residents returned to Nantucket they
     were informed that there had been “a great falling off among the
     nineties” that winter; and it was noted that much vivacity and
     charm had gone from the island social gatherings.




STRUCTURES.


    They have taken the old houses,
    Lovingly they have taken them;
    Bound up their wounds, bandaged their aching sides,
    Made them soft friendships of pretty paint
    And kindnesses of mortar....
    They’ve made little paths this way
    And little paths that way
    And cosseted and crooned and coaxed and cared,
    Till the old houses, the very old houses,
    Stand up quite proudly with a dear and ancient pride.
    All day long--all day long they meditate,
    In spite of all the pretty paints;
    In spite of all their mended ceilings, do they meditate
    On the old houses, the very old houses
    That they were when they died.

    And so I suppose with the old ideas,
    Rickety old ideas,
    Heart-broken shapes that stand in field and sky;
    Cleverly we re-paint them,
    Cleverly decorate and give them quite new hinges,
    And open them up and brick them in and hold them,
    All that is good in them, away from ruin....

    Yet, all year long the old ideas are walking,
    All year long the old ideas are talking,
    Talking through our every act and glance,
    In spite of all our efforts to be new and useful,
    In spite of all our efforts, we go acting
    By the rickety old ideas,
    The shapeless, bulged ideas,
    The mildewed, damp ideas
    That have died.




PSYCHOSCIENCE.


    He, who is far from home, knows when the snow
    Gives way before the sunny urge of Spring,
    When the first ecstasies of bluebirds go
    Through blossomed loops and boughs bee-murmuring,
    When brier roses starrily compose
    Upon the scented spray--he, homesick, knows.

    He, that is far from love, knows when the face
    That knew his face is raised to summer stars;
    He, like that other, hungers in his place,
    And, like that other, grips his prison bars--
    And when that upturned face can no more smile,
    He knows; and whispers comfort, mile on mile.

    He, who feels far from God, knows when the Word
    Comes light upon a golden-shadowed hill;
    On his dim path the radiance has stirred,
    Deep in a dream he shrines his knowledge; still
    Keeping his thorny ways, intent he goes,
    Knowing the Hidden that infinitely knows!




BEACON LIGHTS.


    When I am cowardly, sick of the fight,
    Dumb for the right word, nerveless for deeds that dare,
    Blaze up in my heart, square little Brant Point Light;
    Light me a broad path starred with a burnished flare!

    If I am tossing on a sea of doubt,
    And have no harbor, no fair shore to know,
    Sankaty, like an angel, spread your great wings out,
    Headland and coastward light, give me your glow!

    If I am lost and waves go over me,
    Tossing, engulfing hollows o’er my head;
    Thou, Great Point Light, will surely cover me,
    And by thy strong white clue I shall be led!

    When I am caught in foam of treacherous beach,
    And all the darkness presses like a wall,
    Blaze, Island lights, beyond the Island reach;
    Beacon me to the Utmost Light of all!




WHEEL.


    The growing’s finished. Down the garden ways
    The Gardener comes, slow-trundling his barrow.

    He brings a load of curious loamy mulch,
    Brings tools that cut and stab the earth,
    That lop the boughs from off full-blooded trees.

    Under the falling leaves the Gardener stands,
    Unshocked to see the tulip and the rose,
    Red haw, brown seed-pod, lily staff and leaf--
    All lying dead, extinguished, passionless.

    The Gardener smiles to see the adventurous bee
    Lying cold-killed under a broken stalk;
    Smiles on a battered moth with frosted wing.

    He spreads black clods of compost on the beds,
    Sifts ashes all around the roots of trees,
    Lops off, cuts back, prunes, digs away and kills.

    Knowing how, out of the ruin and wreck,
    Pure glowing things will come; new winged forms,
    Trees that shall say new things to listening souls.

    O Unseen Gardener of the World-tree, boughs
    Ripe with strange star-fruit dropping in the fields
    Of vast Space-gardens--give, Thou, me to learn
    In simple ways, how, after this life’s dream
    I may accept new growth, even to loss
    Of this life-consciousness--to help Thy plan!

    Become, for Thee, a dried-up flower cup,
    A butterfly unwingéd, broken-plumed,
    Even a blinded, helpless, light-killed moth--
    So that I nourish forth new growing things
    In the star branchéd garden of deep Time!

    Grant that this brain, that dares to dream of Thee,
    As Father, Friend--taught of the sentient flowers,
    Shall dream--dream on to some far endless end!




NANTUCKETER IN FRANCE.


    They would take the hill next day--the order, he knew,
    And the kind of hell the “taking” would be, he had seen;
    So he spent the night awake and the hours flew,
    As he pondered on the sort of man he had been,
    And wondered what dying and doing it bravely would mean.
    “_The Eighty-second’s coming along tonight!_”
    He remembered then. There were men in that regiment knew
    His Island home. Men that were going to fight
    For the moors he loved and the pines where arbutus grew.
    Well--he thought he would like to pass them a word or two.

    He thought he would like to see them, to talk of the hill
    By Polpis Harbor, the grey little farm roofs slant;
    Of the way the sunset flared through the fans of the Mill,
    And the rolling moorland hiding the plover and brant,
    And the scallopers sailing their boats through Autumnal chill.

    He thought he would like to talk of the gilded dome
    Of the Unitarian Church, of the cobbled square;
    And speak with others sea-faring names of home,
    Wondering, “Do they hear of the fighting there
    Where Sankaty Light stands guard with its solemn flare?”

    So he stood all night, on those dark hours of the earth,
    Calling to men slogging by to heroic ends,
    [A]Shouting: “_Nantucket_,” little grey town of his birth;
    Palely he stood there, anxious as one who sends
    S. O. S. scanning the night for friends.

    “_Nantucket!_” he hailed--but the river of men rolled by,
    Every eye set grim towards its Mecca of bloody drench;
    No answering Island voice took up his cry
    But his own soul answered. He went back to his trench
    Resolving how a Nantucket man would die!

[A] A true incident.




FISHING ON STEAMBOAT WHARF.


    High all our prisons,
    We can no more out;
    Words meant to free us,
    Compass us about;
    And a sigh means a laugh
    And a hymn a battle shout.

    But here silence mellows
    Starved being into life;
    With these dreamy fellows--
    Rod, reel and jack-knife--
    Even the caught fish are blithe.

    Green water laps the spiles,
    The silence is golden;
    Every little whiles
    I am beholden
    To a sea captain
    Of a time olden.

    He puts on the bait
    Of quahog, that gets me
    A bright little flipper,
    Or a plaice fish nets me;
    That I’ll haul in a whale
    He occasionally bets me.

    Silence and fishing,
    Sun, understanding;
    Fun to see off-islanders
    Tack in and miss their landing.
    Quiet winks exchanged
    While tobacco you’re handing.

    No boasting here,
    No meanness with minnows;
    Commonwealth of Bait
    Debts only finn-owes;
    And a great quiet kindness
    And much color blindness.

    Maybe it comes from
    Looking down so deep,
    Where much is hidden
    And much lies asleep;
    With your eyes on the line,
    Given you to keep.

    Quiet pipes lit,
    Quiet eyes reflective,
    Rips a silver fish
    From out the perspective;
    To go fishing on the wharf
    Is my one great Objective!




THE WALLACE DAISY FIELD.


    Slim pointed pickets guard the summer dream,
    Glimpsing behind their lichen-scrolléd bars;
    Young shapes of white that in ethereal stream
    Toss starry incense to the summer stars.
    Ranked slender acolytes in harbor lane,
    Communion bear to many a churchless breast;
    Processional in falling summer rain,
    Recessional to gold and Gothic West.

    Only a daisy field--yet one man’s care
    Enshrines it in immaculate gated reach;
    Inviolate flowers veil them mistily there,
    Spreading like moonlight to the moonlit beach ...
    Where the white patens disk the tabled green
    Is read the sacred Word of sea and skies;
    Chapelled within this occult daisy screen
    Is Sacrament for beauty-loving eyes.




YOUTH AND THE OLD MILL.


YOUTH

    Old Mill, grind me corn
    For my house by the thorn,
    For I’m with the old folk,
    Where the pigs in the poke
    And the cows in the barn
    And the peat’s on the stone
    And the latchstring out-thrown....
    Old Mill, grind me corn
    For the winter morn.


OLD MILL

    No grain can I grind thee, Modern Child,
    My sails are tattered,
    My grind stones scattered;
    My cranks are riddled
    With rust defiled ...
    But I’ll turn you a dream,
    A Grey-Town dream,
    At which many have smiled
    And been beguiled.


YOUTH

    Turn me a dream then, doughty Mill,
    Flaring there on your windy hill
    With your rickety arms spread on the sky;
    Black crows from the cornfields passing you by,
    Near the burying-ground where the Quakers sleep,
    And the sailors home from the ranging deep
    Turn me a dream, you strange old Mill,
    Keeping your watch on the windy hill.


OLD MILL

    Shall I turn you a dream of the Town Crier calling
    His news ’gainst the tempest bawling?
    Shall I turn you a dream of Three Vikings sailing
    The rim of a low lying island hailing ...?
    Turn you a dream of a Smuggler grim
    And the underground path for his mates and him?
    Of Three forms walking a midnight road
    To a lonely farmhouse where one light showed
    And a paper signed with a white quill pen
    That helped bring freedom to slave-born men?
    Of a man who made a telescope
    And lassoed the stars with a mental rope--
    Of the woman who worked in a cottage small,
    Whose name in science leads them all?
    Of a knight who came and built a school?
    Of a woman who broke a cast iron rule?
    Of the Quaker forms and the gentle ways
    That ruled all war out of the ways?
    Of the Indians, watching the sun go down?
    Of the whalers and gold seekers of renown?


YOUTH

    Nay, Old Mill, I laugh in your face;
    Turn me no dream of a Quaker past,
    Turn me no dream of the tranquil ways,
    Turn me a dream for my own tense days,
    Turn me a dream for my cherishing--
    A dream for believing;
    A dream for my strength!


OLD MILL

    Shall I turn you a dream for your loneliness?
    A dream of the star-scattered faces about you,
    And the plans and pleasures and pains that flout you?
    Shall I tell of the voices that you must hear
    Before some one Voice calls you clear?
    (But whatever it be--for joy and sadness
    Or triumph, defeat, or grief or gladness--
    That I cannot know,
    Said the Old Mill very low.)


YOUTH

    Nay, Old Mill, if you know the voices
    That make for a bold life’s chance and choices,
    Turn me that dream!


OLD MILL

    Only the sound of one voice, you shall hear,
    A Voice that has known your soul forever;
    A Voice that has called you and kept you wherever
    You failed or won in your high endeavor--
    The Voice of your Dream!


YOUTH

    O Mill, give me no mystery;
    I know the way of human history--
    Turn me true dreams!


OLD MILL

    Only the dream of Beauty, I know,
    The long sky paved with the afterglow;
    The moonlaced bog and the shimmering seas,
    The floating mist through moorland trees;
    The quiet color of twilight dunes,
    The night heron croaking its ebb-tide runes;
    The black-walled sky and the star-strung vines,
    The pooling spread of the Island pines.
    And the Sea’s voice borne on the salt mist breath,
    Where the chained arbutus wandereth....
    The strange glad swerve of the moorland road
    And the great black shoulder of the wood....
    (Only these things I know,
    Said the Old Mill very low.)


YOUTH

    Then Old Mill, since no dream you grind me
    A dream of my own I will surely find me!

    But as Youth weaves and catches the threads
    Of a hundred human joys and dreads,
    Youth sees the Old Mill standing there,
    High on the hill with the West aflare ...
    And dark as it looms on the sky, it seems
    The Old Mill steadily turns out dreams--.
    “All’s well,” grinds the grave Old Mill;
    “All’s well,” grinds the brave Old Mill;
    “If your eyes and your heart hold loveliness,
    And your mind and your soul know faithfulness,
    And your eyes and your hands know steadiness....
    You shall walk straight over the rim of the years
    To the Vivid Land of all conquered fears;
    With your heart set true and your eyes set straight,
    You will grind good dreams from the grist of fate.”
    (But that’s all I know,
    Said the Old Mill very low.)




SCISSORS GRINDER.


    “’Twas long ago” they said
    Of the country whence I came,
    “Greece is a dream that is dead,
    Athens only a name!”
    Yet on this April day
    As I go through the towns,
    I see soft Thessaly
    On these New England downs.
    I see the lilied plains
    Where the white cranes droop their bills;
    And the moving cattle trains
    Winding into the hills;
    While the farmer drums his bees,
    And the donkey shakes his bells
    Under the olive trees
    Where the Bay of Corinth swells,
    To great blue-silver gate
    Where the sea-bound temples wait,
    And the Eleusinian way
    Mistily winds the bay.
    On Knossos’ shady knolls
    I see the columned tiers;
    And the cool Ionic scrolls
    Throb to Olympian cheers.
    I see a gravelled stream
    Winding Olympian reeds;
    Again the Scythian dream
    Its wagoned people leads.
    The river-god drifts on,
    Raising a poppied head;
    A pipe sounds halcyon--
    Nothing of Greece is dead ...!

    But I, who walk the towns
    To sharpen knives at the gate,
    Feel sharper knives in the frown
    Of this New World’s estimate!




WHISPERS.


    What was it the wind said,
    Blowing from the Orient
    To the Cross on the hill,
    And the fans of the Mill?
    What was it the wind said,
    Blowing at twilight,
    To New England?

    The wind that blew from the East
    Blew dreamily,
    A low song and strange song had the sea.
    The Islanders sought each other’s eyes,
    And young men dreamed enterprise;
    Then sails put from the shores,
    And wives stood alone at the doors;
    For the old world, the strange world, called
    To New England!

    White sails stole out
    On the silver sound,
    They ran into storms
    Outward bound;
    They could not stay home
    And they would not turn back,
    For the Old World,
    The dim world,
    Called to New England!

    Now, in the old house
    Where the chimneys stretch wide,
    Young wives talk by the fireside;
    On the walls there is Delft,
    And the lacquered trays,
    Jades, teak and teapots,
    Fans of gallant days;
    China, tortoise and pearl,
    Ivory carved like lace;
    Chuddah, Cashmere, Sandal,
    In some secret place....
    And what say the young wives,
    The frank young wives,
    To the stranger’s face?

    “No one guessed how they knew,
    Nor what the wind said,
    And the sailors are gone
    And the merchants are dead;
    But the toppling summer sea,
    And the pale blue winter world,
    Came often and oft again,
    And the years like sails furled.
    Men died on the ships
    And were buried at sea,
    Men languished on wild coasts,
    Lost in mystery....”

    “No one knows what was said
    Nor what answered again,
    When the wind blew a strange way,
    The wind blew a new way,
    For Nantucket men,
    And the Old World called to New England!”




NOT THE GIFT BUT THE GIVER.


    Suppose that o’er the blue thin circling line
    Where low clouds sleep, some figure-head should shine;
    White swelling sails spread out on fan-streaked skies,
    And a new vessel in the west should rise.
    Suppose this vessel, from untraveled zones,
    Through savage suns and fierce Eurocyldons
    Should bring me deeply buried in its hold
    A mystic gift of jewels and blazing gold.
    And, having safely brought the precious thing,
    Should spread its sail, augment each shining wing,
    And calmly, like a night-bird through the stars,
    Speed on again, crossing the distant bars;
    Then through the mists go out before my eyes,
    Leaving me standing there beside the prize.
    I, left on lonely shores, would ever mourn
    The messenger that sailed beyond the bourne;
    I, left on lonely shores, would only pray
    To see again the ship that sailed away.
    I, searching the horizon’s purple round,
    Would follow ships, hither and thither bound,
    Longing for this--to see the dim prow lift,
    That brought to me my longing with my gift.

    And so with thee, who broughtest me thy truth
    Ablaze with jewels, alight with mystic signs,
    Then vanished. Lo! with what utter ruth,
    The sorrow of my gift my soul divines.
    Holding with yearning talismans of thee,
    Who hath passed on beyond the touch of me.




THE BALL.


    How do we see our world--
    Formless? Vague?
    A rude sphere hurled through space?
    A green kaleidoscope of trees,
    And the flash of seas?
    And life and movement in every place?

    I see my world with color wet;
    With the golden sap
    Pushing the green to the ardent sky.
    I see the ripeness, the warmth of fruits,
    Round to the sun, plumed melody,
    The clasp and the subtleties of roots;
    I see gods walk on the morning hills,
    Up the dappled brooks and the secret lanes
    And vistas leading to ferny haunts,
    Where the vivid crimson cardinal flaunts
    In calm of tree-pillared fanes.

    I see my world star-fretted, caught
    In the web of enchained eternities--
    With the age-old moon on her stair, cloud wrought,
    Climbing the night-sky’s precipice;
    I see the silver wheel of tides,
    The night spell hid in the forest breast,
    The gold splashed dawn that gravely glides
    Over grey mountain crest.

    O World, whirling out with the sun,
    And holding us, everyone,
    When the golden skies twilighted lean
    To the purple hills--What have they seen,
    Who were born, still blind, in a web of days,
    To thy lessons written in simple ways?
    Dull streets choked with dusty forms?
    Crowds and houses and groups and swarms
    Who strive, and lose, and are gone again?
    A world of sordid women and men?
    A crowd of petty and dull and mean?
    Not a flower face nor a splash of green--
    Unless--O world, they have seen it all--
    The miracle of thy Wonder-Ball!




THE TOWN CLOCK GIVES ADVICE TO THE TOURIST.


    If you walk on Main Street,
    Turn your fancy loose,
    Out of lace and lacquer
    You may pick and choose;
    Poetry of race and clan,
    Demure maid and solemn man,
    All the lore is stored away
    In these houses brick and grey.
    Puritan and worldly wise
    Trod these stones that meet your eyes;
    Hoary old aristocrats,
    Old chairs, parrots, lace and cats;
    Old umbrellas, ivory canes,
    Whale and ship for weather vanes;
    Soldiers’ Monument and bank,
    Shops and studios in rank;
    New sails spread or old sails furled....
    Main Street’s where you meet the World!

    If you turn in Salem Street,
    Better have a care;
    The Law is on your left
    And the red jail is there.
    They don’t burn witches
    But you’d better beware!

    If you walk on Whale Street,
    Roll some in your gait;
    Make believe that caravels
    For your coming wait;
    Square-rigged and clipper-built,
    Wind jammer and schooner,
    Will bear you off on cruises
    If not later, sooner!

    On North Water Street
    Salt creeps into speech;
    Looking down the little lanes
    You will see the beach.
    All along North Water Street,
    Please to make a note,
    All that’s worth saying
    Is said about a boat.

    If you walk on Milk Street,
    Keep your wits about you;
    Don’t let any saucy star
    On Vestal Street scout you.
    Curtsey to the Old Mill,
    Snatch a rose from arbor;
    Milk Street’s a nice street
    To come in harbor.

    If you walk through Pleasant Street,
    You are sure to see
    Many brilliant knockers
    Shine reflectingly;
    Gardens full of spicy bloom,
    And real ladies taking tea.

    If you go through Orange Street,
    You will have a glance
    At Japanese poetry
    And English romance;
    You’ll smell paint, hear some radio,
    And see among the wise
    A scholar with a Christian’s face,
    And two great grey eyes.

    If you walk through Centre Street,
    You will surely meet
    A true, true, woman
    With voice and manner sweet;
    And there the windows fairly talk,
    And the fences are so neat.

    If you walk through Lily Street
    The sunset’s at the end
    Honeysuckle claims you
    Like an old friend;
    And quaintly blocked upon the skies
    Old houses on “Gull Island” rise.

    If you walk through Quince Street,
    Never stand and stare,
    Hollyhocks will ask you
    To go otherwhere;
    Apples growing you may see,
    Raspberry and pear tree;
    Wisdom and a pretty wit
    If you know where to look for it.

    If you walk through Joy Street,
    Take a little heed
    To keep a fairly sober air,
    Dignity you’ll need;
    There’s something about Joy Street
    Goes to the head indeed.

    And when you are in Gay Street
    Choose a sober pace,
    Clematis along the fence,
    Shakes its stars like lace;
    And twinkling little cups of flowers
    Toss in a sheltered place.

    If you look for money,
    There’s New Dollar Lane,
    And Mill Street, another street
    With a pirate pointing vane;
    Consulting maps and other code
    You’ll find the Thousand Dollar Road!

    And last of all, wherever you walk,
    Stagger through Stone Alley,
    Slip along the cobbled stone,
    Slide methodically;
    Honeysuckle may evade,
    Birds shilly-shally,
    But a good place to meet a maid
    Is in Stone Alley.

    How e’er you walk in any street,
    Wear a pleasant smile
    As if you hoped to meet a dream
    Before the next mile--
    And you may find that dream
    Waiting by a stile!




CUP.


    I walked among them with my cup of blue;
    It was aflame sometimes, and sometimes trembled
    With sweet of all the exquisite things I knew.
    Yet was I feared to tell the draught, dissembled,
    My wish to have these strangers taste the brew
    That to my lip all sky and sun resembled.

    I walked among them, holding up my grail;
    Holding it steady, bidding to the drinking.
    It was the best I knew; luminous, pale,
    Changeful and fiery in its bubbled winking;
    I watched its vital depth grow warm and sunny,
    Ethereal-bitter--sometimes sweet as honey.

    I walked among them with my cup of blue;
    They laughed and turned to chatter at my rapture.
    “What cup is this,” they asked, “of simple brew?
    What un-sure Wine, what grail of dullard’s capture?
    This is no drink to slake our fevered dryness;
    This mead for us would hold but acid wryness.”

    I walk among them with my azure bowl,
    To fete and market-place and to the threshing;
    Today there is no feast, there is no soul
    But craves the cup I bring, nor its refreshing,
    And yet in vain I raise my flashing beaker
    And pledge my toast--to Truth and the Truth Seeker!




TO ABRAM QUARY

(The Last Indian on Nantucket)


    When the long shadows fell across the wind,
    And the dense sheep moved grayly on the moor,
    How was it with you, Island Amerind,
    Sitting dream-bound beside your Shimmo door?
    Did tides that curved the ripples to that shore
    Remind you that somewhere the Source must be
    That sent you, outward ripple of a race half spent--
    Bewildered son of hidden continent?

    Dark, dying Indian, with grave hand bowed
    In untaught dreaming of dark ancestry,
    Saw’st coast and vineyard and the stalwart crowd
    Of young red men embarking on the sea?
    Or up great rivers in some land of rain,
    In swift canoes chasing the brilliant feather,
    Or dancing God-thoughts in the harvest weather?

    All gone? No trail? No scrolléd birch barks sign
    To hand the tale from father down to son?
    What meaning was in totems’ reptiled line?
    What old taboo in crest and trophy won?
    What mightiest Chieftain led the hunting bout
    Or what dark Sachem fathered all the swarms
    Of circled fire lights’ solemn squatting forms?

    Maybe the Outward Trail was marked with stars
    That shone of old in ancient weather book;
    Perhaps old campfires lit old forest scars,
    Or in the sky where some Great Spirit shook
    A mighty spear: perhaps thy brothers stayed
    To welcome thee, when stern and unafraid
    Thy moccasined feet fared those mysterious trails
    That Aqueous Time like clear brook water veils.




3 A. M.


    He came and sat with me, that One
    Whom we so fear. And as I looked
    Closer upon him, lo! I felt
    Myself unfearing. “Death,” I asked,
    “Why is it that no man hath read,
    Nor understood thee?” Then he gazed
    With that dark glory of his eyes,
    Answering: “If men could know
    How I yearn toward them; if they saw
    The things that I would show them; Yea,
    Could trust, accept, come to me kind,
    Like little children! It were well!
    ’Twere well, indeed, if this could be.
    “I am afraid of Life,” said Death, and smiled at me.




ON THE JETTY.


    Still the old rage, O Sea?
    Blue lightnings buried under snowy shock
    Of white foam-bodies dying on the rock;
    Such sobbing passion to be still more free--
    Still the old yearning ... Sea?

    Still the old secret ... Sky?
    Cloud galleons sailing for some coast of Dream,
    And robber winds a-gallop for the gleam
    Of Western gold where purple banners fly--
    Still the old questing ... Sky?

    Still the old bondage ... Heart?
    Slave to a beauty that defeats the mind;
    Enchained, whose bondage even yet may find
    True words, the whole glad wonder to impart
    Meaning of Sea and Sky and Thee ... O Heart!




WINDROW.


    Old figures in a lane,
    Toward the grey church going;
    Vines tapping on a pane,
    Strong wind blowing.

    Old comers by a lane,
    Heads bowed and hoary;
    Stiff knees and tapping cane,
    Wind knows the story.

    Old patterns in a lane,
    Toward the grey church going;
    Follow through veils of rain,
    Brown leaves blowing.

    Old blooming through the lane,
    Pods, grey and brittle;
    Wind ... bring all back again--
    Young, gay, little!




THE SWIMMER.


    Tonight the ocean calls,
    The stars respond, wide-scattered through the skies;
    Swift through the cool of curling wave he hies,
    Who swims far out, nor sees the shore receding--
    Only his strength, his long bold measures heeding.

    Proud in his power, strong,
    From hateful touch of hands that haunt him, free
    He plunges forward through dark wastes of sea,
    Passionate in the careless joy of roaming
    Through billowed gulfs, forgetful of his homing.

    Tranced in the summer night,
    Lying far out on the high-breasted deep,
    He dreams alone. Lo! In illumined sleep,
    White Naiads gleam in dim sea-groves and hollows,
    Under the tide-drawn heaving path he follows.

    Until the stars slip down,
    And to far shores the pale night drifts away;
    Then he turns back to meet the break of day,
    Through the broad surges in blind rapture leaping,
    Until he feels the sand and the foam creeping.




IN THE ANTIQUE SHOP.


    All day the silver-headed craftsman bends
    Over the broken chain, the gemless rings,
    The voiceless clock, the fragile fan, and mends
    With delicate fingers rare broken things.
    I gaze on him, on gems and glimmering gold,
    See light restoring touches, magic skill;
    Till to my heart come strange imaginings
    Of ruined lives I know, shattered and still.
    O Craftsman! Here is mettle, dull and old;
    Look on these broken lives. Can’st thou remold?
    Can’st thou, with color, love designs refill--
    Bring beauty out of sorrow’s patternings?




THE CARDINAL FLOWER.


    Wrapped in his crimson gown and cowl,
    Beside her slender form he stood;
    There by the grassy brook they strayed,
    And sun-rise thrush and moonlight owl
    Knew that she listened while he wooed.

    So blue her eyes, so golden fell
    The sunny hair about her face;
    She stepped with delicate sweet pride
    Along the grasses, close beside
    The brook’s cool lily-shadowed place.

    “It was a shame that they should go
    Thus side by side, at last to part,”
    Earth said: “Mine all this color now,
    Her soft blue eyes, gold hair and brow,
    The red blood in his ardent heart.”

    Men say, “They died.” They passed away;
    I am not sure what trail they took.
    But where the grasses bend and sway,
    Red Cardinal flower burns its way--
    Forget-me-nots grow in the brook.




WILD BIRD.


    I said I had tamed them all and caged them,
    The myriad birds of my dream;
    Called them by docile names and paged them,
    With law and precept I engaged them,
    And I sat with my tame birds all around me--
    Sat where you others came and found me.

    See, here is Ardor--his wings are clipped;
    And here is Truth (with spotted breast);
    Imagination, preening her plumes;
    Adventure, stolid, in golden barred rooms--
    My myriad birds, my wild birds of no name,
    “All tame (like yours) I said--all tame now,
    Tame....”

    And I sat with you, friends, and was suffered of you:
    “The Bird-Fancier has tamed her birds--no fears.”
    And I sat with you, listening through my tears.

    For there was one wild bird (one I left wild, to see
    That there ever had been with me such as he)--
    One wild bird, clean as the sky--and free....

    There come cries sometimes--black ducks, grey gulls,
    Plover, wild swan, sickle billed curlews;
    There are long dotted streamers across the sky
    Of freedom and quest that cannot die....
    There come songs....
    And I sit and smile, with my tame birds preening,
    From my window leaning....

    Then he flies by the casement....
    A stir of wings--a shape on the stars;
    My head lifted, my heart on fire....

    “My soul on your wings--Wild Bird!”




SABATIA POND.


    Where the soft circle of Sabatia stars
    The water grasses in a sprinkled arc;
    And golden ripples break on sandy bars,
    And thin blue sails of dragon flies embark--

    I think each year, how many sunsets weep;
    That day must die; and tinted tears must fall
    There where pond ripples to white clethra creep,
    And where the margin’s sweet with honey-ball.

    I think that where those sky-tears placid lay,
    That golden evening stars have also lain;
    Reflected on the rosy surface, they
    Have dreamed a dream, and wandered on again.

    So, where the sunset clouds in sorrow crept,
    Now rosy shapes through water grasses trail;
    And on that bed where gypsy starlight slept,
    Is left a rose-colored star-patterned veil.




THE LOST DRYAD.


    I am a lost dryad,
    Wandering tranced in the lovely blossoming wood,
    Following paths where the shy bright berries wait,
    Entering glades where the birds have secrets and nests....
    I am a lost dryad!

    One came who woke me and bade me come forth,
    Gladly I stepped from the tree and put out my hand;
    Gladly, like children, we hurried forth to the sun,
    But our play was only begun ere a bitter Will had hushed it--
    I am a lost dryad!

    I cannot go back to the Tree--the bark is mended and closed,
    I cannot remain in the wood for the flowers are dumb and reproachful;
    The birds are afraid to have my eyes on their nests,
    The brooks have closed their waters like windows that gleam....
    I am a lost dryad!

    And so I wander in smiling pride of my state,
    Purer than woodland things that will have none of my pureness;
    Wiser than human things that do not reck of my wisdom;
    Lost in the dream of a thing that was dimly shown me,
    Bewildered, though calm, broken and proud like a princess--
    I am a lost dryad!

    Ye who listen in the trees, O, never come forth
    Unless ye have spells to bind the Intruder unto thee.
    Unless ye have spells to hold the Enchantment forever,
    Stay in your tree prisons--there at least there are weavings
    And pleasant sense as of home and things familiar.
    I go wandering forever, alien and speechless,
    Chance that broke the bark of the tree is formless and vanished;
    Now the healed heart of my home no longer opens--
    I am a lost dryad!




PATTRAN.


    Does the Moon love best
    When the trees write fortunes on the West?
    When the webs are done,
    All the milkweed spun,
    And when brown roads up to the blue sky run?

    Does the Moon love best
    When the budding creeps from the sunny South
    Where the crocus leaps,
    And the robin cheeps,
    And the earth is a-blossom with rain-wet mouth?

    Does the Moon love best
    The wild winds driving out of the North?
    The hazel rod,
    And the brown seed-pod,
    And the Autumn censers swinging forth?

    Oh! the Gypsy Moon,
    Wandering ways so silverly!
    Hers is the love of cricket-shoon,
    And wigwam corn,
    And the smell of morn,
    And October grasses on vagrom dune!




ROOF-TREE.


    Far from the highway stands the empty home,
    With unhinged door and warped and shrunken stair;
    Over its walls the chilly shadows roam,
    Rank to its lintels huddled ivies come;
    Past its blind face the startled swallows fare.

    Wrapped in its memories, it stands aloof,
    Strange to itself, patient in wind and rain;
    No tender hearth-breath curls around its roof,
    No voice within welcomes or calls reproof;
    No child’s face peers behind the cobwebbed pane.

    Let us not wonder why--we shame it more
    With echoing voice and stir. Let us depart,
    Turning in pity from the hapless door,
    Closing the dumb gate in awed silence, for
    This is the dead hope of a human heart.




EVENING AT FRANKLIN VALLEY FARM. 1918.


    The lantern throws a wavering shadow round
    The umber aisles; the cows in stanchions rowed
    Turn their soft gaze, their curving horns surround
    The fragrant tossing of their rustling food;
    Their limpid eyes, their breathing, slow, profound,
    Seem on some great unworded Theme to brood--
    Some evenness of sky and solitude,
    Or placid pool or hill with maples crowned.

    From stall to stall the horses’ darkling eyes
    And upflung heads connote our interlude;
    And scenting nostrils whicker their surprise
    At human forms that on this peace intrude;
    The shadows smell of milk, and straw, and rude
    Farm implements accent the lantern-patch;
    Ringed globules tremble on the bundled thatch,
    Leaping to dusky beam and rafter wood.

    Past horned head and ponderous chestnut flank,
    The fitful light-dance swings along the floor,
    And wanders to the star-specked aqueous blank
    Made by the sliding open of the door;
    A snowy feather, where the pigeons soar,
    Wavers adown, and odors keen and rank
    Filter through darkness of a Minster-grey
    Where filmy cobwebs swim along the hay.

    Perhaps these beasts of burden wait once more
    For Wise Men, and a Shining all around,
    To see Redemption by the Manger door,
    Illumined faces on the rushy ground;
    Perhaps they draw their slow breath, tranced and bound,
    Instinctly taught that they new forms shall wear,
    Who shall some day be swift, no burdens bear,
    And have their tongues made eloquent in sound.

    But, if the hallowed shining does not come,
    And they look through the dark with unchanged stare,
    And if those great grave mouths stay always dumb,
    ’Twill not be ignorance but some truth they share;
    Who have no doubts, no clamorings and no fears,
    But faithful to the clumsy guise they wear,
    Walk patient down their plodding driven years.

    While we in princedoms of our God’s own form,
    Wistfully pause in their oblivioned light,
    Longing to stay with uncouth beasts tonight;
    For that their calm would keep our spirits warm
    And soothe us back to the glad human norm.
    Would gladly share with them their sacred things,
    Their freedom from our restless questionings,
    So we won quietude from stress and storm.

    Mingling our vigil with their Burden-Speech,
    Their revery.
    We would take of that wisdom they can teach,
    Learn how this comes to be ...
    That brooding in the silent darkness here,
    Slaves of a labor lasting all the year,
    They, and not we,
    Become the Masters of Tranquility!




VISION.


    I saw the Search-light, like a seraph, fly
    Over the water’s moved mysterious face,
    Bridging the harbor, pushing darkness by,
    Pouring its flood upon a far-off place.

    I thought--no gleam can travel where they wait,
    No human light throws silver on their shore;
    Their crystal Sea’s unmargined like the great
    Love which they know, and rest in evermore.

    I thought--no light can show the flowers they bear,
    Their heaven-looks, the tender things they say;
    No light reveals the raiment that they wear,
    Nor all the bliss of their unwearied Day.

    And yet, who knows? So long have yearning men
    Turned to those borders searching, wistful, gaze;
    What stainless light may flash upon our ken,
    What glorious faces smile at our amaze?

    Dim reaches wait, untrodden shores exist,
    The sea of Death completes the solemn scheme;
    But comes the light to sweep away the mist,
    And comes the heart to rightly read the Dream.

         *       *       *       *       *

    I see the Search-light in the years to come,
    Moving anew on borders strange and far;
    I see new coast lines set with lights of home,
    Men’s faces turned toward a near-burning Star.




LOST BEAUTY.


    Because my fathers did, I seek my bed
    While winter night over my dreaming head
    Opens its gorgeous book of trees and stars
    Upon a world that sleeps. The Eastern bars
    Are crossed by ships, all constellation shaped,
    That sail the winter hills where snowy trees are draped.
    So I, whose muscles and whose blood are bound
    To this faint-hearted scheme of life, do pray
    Those that come after me, that they shall found
    Some life that does not sever night and day;
    So when God’s fleet sweeps up the midnight skies,
    His starry ships will hail unsleeping eyes.




THE BRANCH OF STRANGE BERRIES.

(An Old Man Tells a Story to Some Boys.)


    Black tunnels grooved the sea
    Into caves of night;
    And the furrowed walls of foam
    Were jagged chrysolite.
    No star stayed to chart the way--
    We shuddered, lurching on boiling spray
    In piteous plight of swinging stay
    And black sails torn to flapping rags,
    Blowing in knots and bellying bags.

    I could not sleep; I walked with the salt
    Caking in rifts on my face,
    And I heard my men up in the bows
    Cursing our dreary case.
    They ground their bitter words in their jaws
    As we reeled in the furred seas’ tigress paws.

    Paladin came with his eyes of omen,
    His loose mouth hanging dry:
    “Senor,” he said, “We men leave women--”
    He turned and sneered at the sky--
    “Maybe your love is the love of the ghost
    That shrieks your name from a rock-cursed coast,
    But we know there’s no land like the land thou dreamest--
    No land like thy boyish fancy deemest....

    “Man, if thou knowest the way, turn back
    Over the lost and surging track.
    The men are mad for the food they lack,
    Two ships are lost, the water-skins sag;
    Scurvy’s aboard, the torn sails drag....
    St. Mary! Thou knowest there is no land
    Offers food nor place for our starving band;
    Thou and thy dupes our lives have hurled
    White bones on the reef of a Western World.
    With your jewel-bought quadrants and King-got-gold
    Our homes and kith and kin ye have sold....”

    Paladin whined: “Turn back, turn back
    Over the lost and tossing track;
    Up from this dreaming, silly and slack.”

    I turned on him, I shook my head,
    Through burned and bleeding lips I said:
    “Sail on....” “Sail on,” I said.
    (Though it seemed to me I spoke from the dead),
    “Sail on--Sail on,” I said.

    Then came all terrible wolves of that crew,
    Staring at me--half dead, they knew;
    Yet maddened because my words were few.
    The blood was gone from their hanging skins,
    The rags hung dank on their horny shins;
    They mouthed and muttered: “His eyes roll wild,
    He babbles now like a peevish child.
    O shame, thou madman, thou dangerous Mind,
    That dreams of a country we do not find;
    While we with the blazing sea go blind....
    Art minded to sail till the last one’s dead ...?”

    “Sail on.... Sail on....” I said.

    All night we climbed those seas that mounted,
    Towering to skies that nightly counted
    The empty coin of the foreign stars;
    We saw foam rips on the rock-reefed bars,
    The sea shuttles kept up their ghastly heaving
    On looms of white their black cloth weaving,
    And I thought that they wove me a winding sheet
    That slowly wrapped me from head to feet....

    Day after day the salt spray caked
    On my sunken eyes that burned and ached,
    And the curses fell as my body fell;
    I lay slant like a corpse on the all-day swell,
    (Were it day or night, I could not tell),
    But they called for my blood--yea, their knives were keen
    For the blood of a man, whose fault, I ween
    Was: “He sailed for a country he had not seen.”

    Day by day muttered hate; thick slime
    Oozing from mouths that judged my crime,
    Till they told me: “You die!” And set the time.
    I crawled to the bow and looked out ahead
    For the time was short and the land I dreamed
    Hidden, but near, me-seemed.
    And then--Jesu!--atop one foaming wave
    The Miracle rode--the Carvéd Stick,
    Knobby and rough, its black bark brave
    Notched with rough taboo words and signs
    Of living beings--strange words and lines....

    And then--O Mother of God! it sailed--
    _The branch of strange berries_, its long bough trailed
    On a wave that broke where the sunlight paled.
    Red toppling balls on the white sea-crest
    That heaved it up from the shining West,
    And bore it straight to my sobbing breast.

    The Branch of Strange Berries sailed forth to me
    For the sign of Land and fecundity!

    Shuddering, staggering as one dead,
    I heard them.... “Land.... Land.... Land....” they said.
    “Land!” they shrieked and again they shrieked;
    The wallowing caravel’s timbers creaked
    And I sank down on the deck quite dumb,
    For my answering miracle had come.
    The unbelievable Land was there;
    It slowly loomed on the atmosphere.
    Oh, the dim, dark, strange, unspeakable shore,
    Fringed out on the blue ...! Then I heard them roar,
    “San Salvador.... San Salvador ...!”
    They tossed up their arms, they leaped on the deck,
    Black faces grinned through crusted fleck;
    Bloody-bearded eye and skeleton hand
    Pointed me.... “Senor.... Senor.... Land!”
    Water they brought in an olive wood cup--
    The last roiled drops; to my feet they crept,
    And laughed and kissed me, and raved and wept,
    And my fame they sang (I, who had been
    Believer in things I had not seen).

    Judge of me, God, that I never quailed,
    But that as through hell and horror we sailed,
    “Sail on.... Sail on....” I said.
    Judge of me, God, who, when I cried
    For sign, sent the carved stick overside,
    And the Branch of Strange Berries that rode the tide.
    And pardon my sins, for I was, I ween,
    True to the Country I had not seen....

    Then, Jesu ... judge of those whose speed
    To those new fair shores was confident greed,
    (Now that of courage there was no need);
    Who called me “Master” and called me “Friend,”
    When the bitter doubting was at an end....
    Pity all men whose fate has been--
    “They steer for a Country they have not seen!”




FROM A WINDOW.


    On other quiet summer nights like these,
    I have leaned forth where honey-suckles pressed
    The twilight pane, and watched the priory West
    Send forth its cowled clouds over purple seas--
    Seeing, through eve-blurred glass, the waters rise
    Beyond sea-lavender’s fringed traceries;
    Worshipping, as I worship now, the Sign
    That God and Earth are ever one Divine.

    Only, the flower of lily in the green,
    The scarlet feathered black-bird in the sedge;
    Even the white shell by the water’s edge,
    Seem to have seen God--whom I have not seen.
    Yet with these wistful eyes that may not know,
    Let me dare every doubt and darkness. So,
    Walking blind roads, spanning all voids, I tread
    Earth’s flowing Beauty to its Fountain Head.




RESPONSIBLE.


    I looked over the purple fields and out to the sunlit sea
    And the curve and waft of a gull’s white wing was
       solace enough for me;
    And I had signals from tall green grass and the light
       of sand on the beach,
    But I heard the laughter of girls together,
    Young and vibrant with sunlit weather,
    Laughter of skyward reach.
    And hurrying by with ardent paces,
    I saw anticipance on their faces ...
    Wisdom no age can teach.
    Youth with unconscious gleam and shining
    Kept its eyes on a glad divining,
    Keyed to the tall cliff reach;
    I saw the bloom of these girls together,
    Bloom as of grape and peach;
    And they plained of the wearying wars of men,
    Quivering.... “Give us our world again.
    Give us the youth that shall clasp us close,
    Give us the heart of the perfumed rose,
    Life is our gift while the world is young;
    Shall our eyes be blinded, our song unsung?
    Give us our destiny of yore--
    Do ye pour us all in your Hopper-of-War?”

    Only the young girls down on the beach;
    But out to the world their voices reach,
    Voices of maidens over the dune,
    Flickering back in a windy rune:
    “Give us our oldtime destiny,
    Our tall young mates and our babes to hold;
    Is life for us a tale that is told ...
    Caught in your Battle-Industry?
    Shall we grow wrinkled and pale and old,
    Pouring the lead and smoothing the bore
    In munition moulding forevermore?
    Shall our slender fingers pick lint and bands
    For the shell-shocked eyes and the frozen hands?
    Shall we give our youth for the killing of men,
    And turn us to blood and hating again?
    Give us our destinies of yore,
    Give us our homes by city and shore ...
    Do ye pour us all in your Hopper-of-War?”

    Then I saw the sky in a passion of grey
    Sweep them with fog and shut them away;
    And their voices seemed to die with the years,
    And the mist dripped round them with furtive tears;
    And the waves, wild foaming from tidal deep,
    Stiffened and blanched in their curling leap.
    And a bird, mist-baffled with heavy wing,
    Beat on the chill air wavering....
    And I watched the young forms wistful go
    Where the foggy fields stretched dun and low;
    And their eyes were heavy with solemn woe.
    While far up the beach and across the sea,
    The voices of youth cast a curse on me;
    And the ancient weed on the windblown shore
    Bared me the barren breast of War.




TREE WORSHIP.


    My room has great windows,
    Clear water-like windows
    Awash with golden sun;
    My books shine green and red,
    And the bed is white as milk;
    The rugs flecked like a brook,
    And the shelf holds a silver bowl
    And a candle of honey-gold.

    But I look out of the room,
    Away from the wine-red books,
    To one gaunt shag-bark tree
    That stands playing itself
    Like a swaying cloud-keyed Harp,
    Or writing upon the sky,
    With a myriad twig-keen pens.

    My room has a cushion, soft
    As sea foam on the sand;
    But I look out on the tree--
    It draws me, holds me, speaks,
    And does not speak; is still,
    Dumb, yet singing and glad.

    And I know that I, in the room,
    Silken and warm and soft,
    Am as ignorant as the man
    Who sat in a Dacian cave,
    Clad in blood-soaked skins,
    Gnawing at roots and nuts.

    A man who looked at a tree
    And feared it, and felt its spell;
    And bowed him down in awe,
    And sacrificed, and prayed;
    And was subject to the Tree,
    Thinking it might be--God!




ANOTHER CHANCE.


    Spring’s first Robin perched on the apple tree;
    “Hello!” said I. “Hello!” said he.
    He ruffled his feathers and cocked his eye;
    “We’re back,” said he. “We’re back,” said I.

    He bit the cold buds cheerfully;
    “I see it’s the same old you,” said he.
    I looked him over, perched on high;
    “I see it’s the same old you,” said I.

    “What do you work for this year?” asked he;
    “The same old hopes of last year,” said I.
    “What do you work for this year?” asked I;
    “The same old hopes of last year,” said he--

    “What? After the Cat and that tragedy
    Of your whole nest blown from the apple tree?
    You’ve got the courage that takes you high,
    If you build again after that,” said I.

    “Well, what of your dreams that didn’t come true,
    And the world that mocked and cheated you?
    You must be brave, and I do not see
    How you dare build again,” said he.

    “What d’ye want this year?” asked I;
    “A strong nest under a placid sky
    And your brood to cherish tenderly?”
    “Well, you’ve got it about right,” said he.

    “What do you want this year?” asked he;
    “An answer to all the Mystery?
    Some haven within a faith’s clear sky?”
    “Please God! Yes, Robin, dear,” said I.

    “Well, Spring’s here, anyhow,” said he;
    “Good luck!” and flew from the apple tree;
    “Yes, what ever the hopes that die,
    God gives us another Spring,” said I.




DARK MINSTRELS.


    We heard the poets singing in the dark,
    We saw their lovely lights toss to and fro,
    The while they gathered in their golden Ark
    All the bright images of after-glow....
    They struck us magic chords within the wood,
    Showed us fair shapes alive with naked light;
    They gave us rivers where the dream trees brood
    And lovers wander all the starry night.

    We turned and faced each other and we said:
    “The poets pour us wine--they do not give us bread.”

    For these are singers of dear vanished things,
    The things that once have been but may not be;
    We sit with close shut lips; un-minstrelled, we;
    No heart to chant to these enamored strings,
    No song to chant to medieval lyre
    That strikes us songs of Ninevah and Tyre.

    Our lutes are tuned to dangerous unwalked ways
    Where all is dense and beckoning shapes withdraw;
    Where the untrodden path winds in a maze,
    And lead to things no Seeker ever saw.
    We sing the Mind’s high dream, the imperious will,
    That makes no music out of greedy strife
    But seizes silver pipes, that sharp and shrill,
    Call men to leap and seize on Very Life....
    While other singers tell the old dreams o’er,
    We rise and take us to the outer door;
    Here on the wold, where no wise singer sings,
    We feel the great Hand brush across our strings!




THE PEOPLE OF TODAY TO THE CLERGY OF TODAY.


    Look now about you, fix your eyes on us,
    Leave too-old mystic book and restful chair;
    Take up our problems, things we must discuss,
    Help us to think, to understand and dare.
    Leave old-world Poetry of hallowed crime
    And turn you to the hunger of the time.

    Laws of the God, report them to the ears
    That hear confused and cosmic voices rage;
    Laws of the Christ, interpret them to fears
    For Christ, new-risen in a Science-Age.
    Oh, take the fire your sacred hands should give
    And kindle it upon our city height;
    Give us a world-strong law of wrong and right;
    Teach us, not how to die, but how to live!

    The hymns we sing must be the song of spheres,
    The prayers we pray be truths of stone and star;
    We want no sacrifice of sinner’s tears,
    We want to rise above this clay we are.
    Our war machines, do they not teach the thing
    Your maxims never taught us ...? Ah, we flee
    To the Waste Places in our sorrowing....
    Show us the power of true divinity!

    Look now around you, free your too-white hands;
    Comfort these hearts that burn. What must we do?
    We have no Paul, no Moses, only you.
    Then help us to be honest. From all lands,
    Priests! Men! Arise! Acclaim! The new bread give;
    The Bread by which we shall not die, but live!




PROTAGONIST.


    The fight was unequal, bitter and always new,
    I saw how my enemy gained on me and how he drew
    My strength, my youth, my soul from my shivering frame;
    Yet have I not been beaten--I faced him whenever he came.
    When he stabbed I watched how he did it--Poison, I studied the cup,
    Flayed me with whips, I girded the bleedings up;
    Hunger, imprisonment--all these I wrote in my book;
    I have learned all the enemy’s purpose, I know every look.
    I have conned every gesture and gotten by heart all his guile,
    Yet still comes the fear and the watchfulness under my smile;
    For hard as I struggle to outwit his plot to betray me,
    He holds that utterest thing that can utterly slay me--
    Still do I turn and defy the face of him creeping;
    “Now that I know thee, thou Life, thou art locked in my keeping;
    Dungeoned, thou Horror, in creative cells of desire,
    Ringed in the widening rings of my aspirate fire--
    I, your Creator, by steady implacable strife,
    Shall give men and women a lovelier thing to call ‘Life.’”




SIGNAL FIRES.


    Everywhere we have sought Thee--questioned, wondered,
    Everywhere marked Thy beauty and Thine hour;
    Now if at last no sacrifice is brought Thee,
    Dost Thou believe we doubt Thine awful Power?

    Nay, we have loved, have striven, have served, obeyed Thee,
    Gloried in beauty of Thine, uttered Thy love;
    Given long vigils to attain and mind Thee,
    Spent lives in fixing Thee below, above.

    Still dost withhold Thee, canst ignore this wonder
    Of men who seek Thee in the manner Thou knowest--?
    Humble and longing, ignorant, who blunder,
    Yet loyal to Thy will and where Thou goest?

    We will not cowardly say Thou hast no feeling,
    Will not believe Thou hidest back of the years;
    Or hast no Word for rapturous revealing--
    Art dumb like us; like us, art veiled in tears.

    No. We believe; but now we work nor tire
    Stirring the embers of the Cosmic Night;
    Thou art the Source, we build our answering fire;
    God of our Godhood, answer our Beacon Light!




MARTYR.


    He waved his jests on spears of hidden grief,
    Calmed by his silence all complaint and tears;
    Filled hopeless hours with whimsical belief,
    And laughed at fears.

    He walked his bitter paths alert and bold,
    No pity ever turned his steadfast eye;
    If dull mouths grinned and goblin stories told,
    He cared not why.

    And with what end?
    To end a dream of breath;
    Singing his heart out to all withheld Joy,
    Walking into the labyrinth of death,
    Brave as a boy.




BALLAD OF THE THORN TREE.


    Always, I noticed, lovers lay
    Beneath a twisted tree
    That grew in such a starvéd way
    It seemed a mock to me.
      But when I questioned them, they’d say
    “Oh what is that to thee?
    Bright berries grow in lavish way
    Upon this bitter tree;
    Small scarlet lanterns swinging, they
    For lovers such as we.”

    Always I noticed lovers dreamed
    Beneath that furtive tree,
    And so I said not how it seemed
    Nor how it looked to me ...
    How all along the branches ran
    Sharp thorns like stabbing spears,
    How when the berries dropped away
    The thorns stayed through the years....

    Oh, never do I speak of this
    To lovers loving free;
    The new fruit gleams above their kiss,
    The thorns they will not see....

    Mayhap after such glowing red
    No thorn keeps agony,
    But no fond lover ere has said
    A thing like this to me.




BALLOONS ON THE BEACH.


    Ball on bright ball,
    On the sky glowing,
    The old dreams recall
    Of a child’s knowing;
    Eggs laid by a flying bird,
    Jellies in globed curd,
    Fruits on a strange tree,
    By the winds blowing.

    Now as each bobbing ball
    Tugs at its holder,
    I, who these dreams recall,
    Feel hardly older....
    Drinking enchanted Cup
    From Balloons, I rise up,
    Swaying on sea and sky,
    Color and flight am I!

    Appled Balloon Tree,
    Arched efflorescence,
    Grow shining globes for me,
    Of joyous essence;
    Until bright bubbles spill
    From a cup fancies fill
    Brimmed iridescence!




THEY PASS.


    Down the long road they go--
    Elinor, Mary, Flo--
    Hasting toward Something.
    Daisies rank high today,
    Wild roses spread the way;
    Laughing, light words, they say,
    Speeding toward ... Something!

    Peg, on the other side,
    Watches their splendid stride,
    Shrinking from Something....
    Jennie, with broken tread,
    Where a damp sun is shed,
    Black shawl around her head,
    Staggers from Something!




ON THE BEACH.


    She sat in her gleaming robes
    With the two hard-shining globes
    Of her soul-less eyes, stare-fixed,
    And said: “It is mine to know
    How far he may come and go;
    Mine to make him dance and sing,
    His heart and his money fling
    Away. He is mine to take,
    And play with and bend and break;
    The better for him I think.
    We are put here to try each other.
    Is he strong? He will not sink.”

    The other woman pulled
    The thin shawl over her head.
    “If he is strong?” she murmured
    “If he is strong,” you said.
    “But are we strong?” It is ours
    To spare, to shield, to tend;
    It is his to be hurt and broken,
    To struggle and to fend.
    It is equal, therefore we suffer.
    (He suffers most, I think.)
    We are put here to help each other.
    Are we strong? He will not sink.”




SAUL’S HILLS


1

    Long after all the talking people go
    On the white boat that rounds the sandy point,
    The silenced hollows of the Commons show
    A deepening curve; and where the grasses blow,
    Dried to October wraith, I see annoint
    A hundred lanes and valleys splashed with glints
    Of silver moss and tawny tapered mints.


2

    And where the moor roads plough the tangled sand
    The sky’s blue river floods these merging hills,
    Pocomo Head white morning fire spills;
    The deep swung ponds with sapphire sweep expand
    Walled with red berries of the alder bough;
    Stark monkish trees slant on the windblown space,
    And gulls dip to the bay or open meadow place.


3

    This is a world gone wild with wine of life,
    Tossed in bright cups on frost enholied air;
    Here Autumn swings the west wind’s winnowing scythe,
    Or amber shod strays down the coral flare.
    And on the shimmering slopes the swallows blithe
    Still turn ecstatic honey-tipped wings
    And dart anew on rhythmic balancings.


4

    I think that he who walks this undulance
    Goes like a child back to some crystal Source,
    Rich in adventures of the fields’ romance,
    The thistles’ aeroplane, the gold of gorse;
    Or buoyant, treading silver lichen crisp
    Wing-footed on the elastic sod,
    Fares on the milkweed’s fanned ethereal wisp
    Past semaphore of broom or goldenrod.


5

    For here he finds the ineffable escape,
    The clarity, the cleanness and the soul;
    Here’s laying on of hands, here things reshape
    Into the round equilibrated Whole.
    Here all is light and line, this grey fence strings
    Its silver loops in limpid meadow lights;
    Or drops its bars to infinite wanderings
    By glimmering swamps on brake-illumined nights.


6

    So suave these moor roads that the grasses blur
    Along their misty lines; their curious curves
    Unwind through dusks of bay and juniper
    Past where the marsh hawk flares or rabbit swerves;
    Where pond on mirroring pond among the hills
    Is cupped in vital blue; whose magnet draws
    Spiked pickerel weed; or starred sabatia thrills
    Grass threaded ripples on the sandy shores.


7

    So dumb are human hearts to every sound
    That Nature has! Strangely attuned--dumb still!
    There is no keynote to their most profound,
    No language for true passion of their will;
    Yet in these valleys on these sun-pooled moors,
    Where turf roads wind to fountains of the sky,
    I have seen Souls freed by the out-of-doors,
    To find out here, their liberate ecstasy.


8

    Perhaps these gemmy berries on the slope,
    Perhaps these dryads of the circling hedge
    Write runes of health and happiness and hope,
    Or limn new truth in sand and rippled sedge.
    For those who tread these wastes of Autumn’s reach
    Find dream and vision on the wind-washed lea;
    Thoughts broaden, there is fire in the speech,
    Minds stir beyond their wonted sophistry.


9

    It is the other Self, the questing Ghost
    That walks with us the bayberries’ pungent trail;
    Seeing this life an empty thing, at most,
    Seeing dreams die and all beliefs grow pale.
    Musing on hopes and visions, scattered hosts,
    Till here, beside some mossy lichen rail,
    The sky seems light with truth and starving minds,
    Bathed in new energy of moorland winds!


10

    The rosaries here are little mealy plums
    Trailing like rubies through the tufted moss,
    Here a late bee to evening primrose comes.
    The fields’ grey wreathéd smoky censers toss,
    Where goldenrod has burned from gold to grey;
    And asters smoke on an empurpled way.


11

    Turfed roads that curve away to Madaket,
    Dim roads that wind the valleys to Gibbs Pond,
    Grass roads that dream to Polpis, we have yet
    To find your subtle ends, what lies beyond!
    You wind to wind the world; the simple ways
    Of faith and trust and nobleness and love;
    We only guess the towers beyond your haze,
    We only glimpse the ends toward which you move!


12

    Yet rutted roads, whose mild evasions lie
    Seemingly blind or tortuous or dense,
    Ye are most human in your subtlety,
    Human in all your gentle evidence.
    For though you pause and double, turn again
    And seem to curve and hesitate, your moods
    Are human moods; tired women and worn men
    Follow in dream your errant solitudes.


13

    They come for shriving by the hedgerow things
    Where life, obedient to great moving laws
    Brilliantly dies, or in birth scatterings
    Writes mystical trail with myriad seeds and spores;
    Where the dried weeds with hoary tresses blown
    Quiver in brittle faith and stand serene,
    Where in a tidal sunshine, every cone
    Smells of sea-tree-branch, balsam-broomed and clean.


14

    Solitude on the moors and to one’s self--!
    The blessing comes in spite of torturings;
    In spite of all the gods upon the shelf
    And all the false gods of material things.
    Here where the thistle sends its wayward floss
    Or where the marsh hawk swirls for meadow-food,
    Alone on cloistered roads redeem thy loss
    Of Spirit, in a bay-bushed solitude!


15

    Oh, Spirit of ours, whom we have so betrayed,
    As round these swimming hills our footsteps dream,
    We see thy fugitive shimmer on the blade
    Of every spear of grass; and by the gleam
    Of sea light out at Pocomo and glade
    Of twisted beech by rambling Polpis farm,
    Or by the reedy pool where cattle strayed
    Far from the fields stir up the midgy swarm.


16

    Where all the rolling hillsides soft combine
    On amphitheatres spread to open clefts,
    There is hypnotic soothing in the line
    Merging and melting in soft grassy wefts.
    The brave bright cups that grail the open mead
    Pour flower-libation on some tawny stretch;
    And lily grails snowy processions lead,
    And sweet fern banners guide the banded vetch.


17

    And what does Man? He takes a wealth like this
    And breaks it on the wheel of his machine.
    Tarring it with the foul metropolis.
    Caging its wildness and its free desmesne;
    Little they know they build but to destroy,
    Little they guess what gift they take away;
    The heritage of every girl and boy
    To roam these stretches of the heath and bay.


18

    The exquisite clear candors of these moors
    Seem to their eyes as sad as empty doom;
    Their trivial gaze turns from the barren shores
    And blurs along the ragged hills of broom.
    They pant, they say, for human nature’s food,
    Yes--but they have not walked with happy Solitude!


19

    Grey rain slow drifting over summer hill,
    Over corn fields and through the meadow rifts,
    With falling curtain calms the water till
    Under its scorcery the landscape drifts;
    The loomed mirage goes sailing to the sky,
    The deep lines darken on the distant moors,
    A placid silence lifts in mystery,
    And headlands purple down to light-struck shores.


20

    Then open farm a sterner grandeur takes,
    The church dome glitters on fantastic North,
    The wild ducks’ chain expansion suddenly breaks,
    And many a wedge-shaped line of geese fares forth;
    Fateful the moorland looks and tawny drear,
    Then the clouds lift and all the Island’s clear.


21

    _O Truth, that moves upon the water’s face!
    O Truth, that cleaves the fire and cloud to be!
    Help me with single eye thy form to trace,
    In every form of flower and web and tree;
    Help me to find thee in the cores of waves,
    In every face that dreams into my ken;
    Help me to see thee in the man that braves
    The condemnation of his fellow men!_

    _O shining Truth, sweeping across these fields,
    Calm on the water’s surface, or in storm,
    Help me to find thee in the harvest yields,
    In cloistered rooms and in the market’s swarm!
    Help me to find thee in the name of Sin,
    The immortal shape of Woe that walks alone;
    Help me to hear thy subtle lesson in
    The negative, the dirge, the monotone!_

    _Help me to know thee in the sturdy Mind
    That holds its vision straight across the dark,
    That dares to blaze a trail for all mankind
    Yet wins no high serene nor earthly mark!
    Help me to find thee behind solemn doors
    Where men declare for finer, nobler codes;
    Help me to find thee on the rainy moors,
    And on the wanderings of these rutted roads!_


22

    The days are warm all Indian Summer through,
    Placid and mild with dreaming full content;
    Beach plums and grapes glimmer with frosty dew,
    Rabbits career from hunter provident;
    Mellow and hazy blurs the moorland scene,
    Placid and still on dreamy tides of noon;
    The fishing fleet comes silver laden in,
    And over haystacks floats the harvest moon.


23

    Horizoned moon, so round and thin and strange,
    Great mellow bowl of gold September brew,
    Diaphanous rolling over rolling range
    Of solemn hills that part to let thee through.
    Thou last great Toy of Summer, yellow boon,
    All honey filled, lambent with creamy light,
    Hardly a gazer of us but will croon
    Some childish nonsense to thy disk tonight!


24

    Upon a night of stars, the grave old Mill
    Spreads out its fans upon a scudding sky;
    The crescent harbor’s ebony is still,
    Studded with plangent lights trailed silvery.
    Here is true self, once more with hand on lip,
    Trying to read the night’s deep graven lines,
    Watching the shadow of some late come ship,
    Or muffling darkness of the blotted pines.


25

    The summer streets are filled with flickering swarms,
    The village band is playing and the wheels
    Of farmer wagons clatter past the farms....
    Bright headlights of black bulking automobiles
    Flit back of Monomoy, where Indians, now
    Pressing the clover with accustomed heels,
    Would find great modern monsters on their track
    Beside their wigwam or beyond their shack.


26

    But as the music filters through the town,
    And honey-suckle breathes around the doors,
    One finds the lane as secret as the shores;
    No modern engine treads its sweetness down,
    No smart prospector makes this isle his own,
    For pattern of the cheap and opportune--
    Not ’neath this honey-suckle and this moon!


27

    Back of the town where all the houses turn
    Their mild grey fronts to winds that buffet strong,
    The cobbled streets in patterns quaint and stern,
    Lead to four trees spread on the sky like song;
    Looking at these I paused the other day,
    Wondering that beauty so bestript, forlorn,
    Should strike a chord that takes processional way,
    Crashed on the skies in branches gaunt and worn.


28

    Twisted and starved these bitter trees that blow
    Upon the Western sky like choral song,
    Flinging strange rapture on the after glow;
    Still radiant? Do these dead trees belong
    To some tree-part of us, where bent and maimed
    Green branches wither? Hampered twigs grow wrong ...?
    Hush! On the screen of the bright Western sky
    The crippled trees again burst into song.


29

    Modest these little houses of the town,
    Staring with sober windows over the lea,
    Scattered are peaks and gables toward the down,
    Trailing slow march from seaport to the sea.
    Charmed thing to hear one’s foot-fall sound along
    Some moonlit, bricked, hedged street, whose panneled doors
    Gleam with bright knockers, where the oblivioned stone
    Was trodden once by Quaker ancestors.


30

    _The minstered Vast of immemorial sea,
    Blue vaults and green that cave the Island tides
    Choruses solemn dark immensity
    To that Moon priest that with its law abides;
    The hoodéd waves march on cathedral dunes,
    Flagelant spring the breakers on the rips,
    And the encircling shore is writ with runes
    Of voyaging souls and questing sails and ships._

    _Yea, all around Cathedral Vast of sea
    Blue vaults and green that cave the island’s tides
    Curled toppling Uncials of Eternity
    Illumining the beaches’ glistening sides;
    New consecrate the sand’s communion shell
    With every moonlight chrism and sunrise swell._

    _Clean Island, cloistered ways unspoiled by man,
    The thorn trees cloaked like prophets, and the reeds
    Organ with murmurings of furtive Pan;
    The spirits’ intense strange music, lost from creeds,
    Lost far from love--lost in all modern places;
    Lost from the reading by all human faces,
    Isolate--dumb; but if one wanders here,
    Vocal and strong, immaculate and clear._

    _For now one figure left of all the gods
    Goes singing down the thistle-lighted way;
    One figure wanders through these island moods
    Back from the town and back of all the bay.
    And where the goldenrods their censers sway
    Against a brake or by a grey swamp wood,
    Over the moor steals happy Solitude._


31

    The corn is stacked, the pumpkins’ on the roof,
    Globule on grey their ponderous green and gold,
    The laughing gull wantons its wild reproof,
    The water’s blue is strangely laced with cold;
    Vermilion berries coral the black-hedged pond,
    Around the shore the chilly foam-patch quivers,
    The sweet fern shrivels up its copper frond,
    The owl flaps heavily, the farmland shivers.


32

    These are the roads the island farmers took,
    Slow-following flocks that tinkled towards the town,
    And stopped to crop the clover or to look
    With hornéd stare across the purple down.
    These are the roads the shearers of the sheep
    In high-swung wagons rode; these winding trails
    Moccasins knew, where now the children keep
    To Shimmo Shore with huckleberry pails.


33

    What is the thing that on these commons gives
    Me back to Me? What is this thing that heals
    The cities’ wounds, that shows to me where lives
    The Being of Me? What scorcery reveals
    My hidden Native, blind, unnamed, unsung,
    Wrapped in its passionate ardors like a shape
    Of chambered chrysalid Soul--close woofed, high swung,
    Waiting for sun and rain and winged escape?


34

    There are wild days out on the winter heath,
    Wild days asmoke in mystery and flame;
    The black ducks break their columns into wreath,
    The gaunt trees cringe away in windblown shame;
    The moody skies press to the barren earth,
    Sullen the sea hangs foam around the shore;
    There is a look of starving and of dearth
    Along the shivering roads across the moor.


35

    Then, as if space awed of its yawning breach
    Desired rhythms to sound some message home,
    Crash in great clouds, dark waves of earthy speech,
    The farmlands’ seaweed pile and stubbled loam.
    There is cloud-writing on the scrolled West,
    The church’s dome swells symboled on the sky;
    Austere the landscape, yet so clear expressed,
    It looms to awe and brooding majesty!


36

    And then on Headland or on barren dune,
    The wild light leaps, born of the naked sea;
    The North cliffs are cathedral; there is rune
    And choral in the surf’s antiphony.
    The laborer, who slowly takes his way
    Back to the hamlet in the early night,
    Sees the old village set in convent grey,
    And candled shrines of votive window light.


37

    There are great days in Autumn, when the world
    Turns to blue fire and all the hills are red;
    One hears the fishing gulls’ wild screaming skirled
    Up to the wingéd comrades overhead.
    The Sound is flecked with scudding green and white,
    And beaches stretch away to golden glow,
    Till stars hang garlanded along the night,
    And constellations swing liquid and low.


38

    And foggy days, when wrapped in trailing pause,
    The trees, like ships, sail pearly seas bemused
    With melting sails and ropes of rainy gauze
    Making for harbor, tenuous, confused,
    Anchored in subtle inlets, phantom cruised;
    Where voyagers land unchallenged, unperused,
    With silver myrrh to sanctify the homes,
    And cloudy swirls to hallow forth the domes.


39

    These ships bring stores by which my heart is fed,
    The voyagers of this filmy vapor flight
    Lay balm on gashes where the soul has bled,
    Wrapping its wounds in meshes of soft light.
    And I am soothed of grief, who take a white
    Communion under calm of dripping trees,
    Walking uncandled avenues of rainy night
    With veiléd forms to nebulous mysteries.


40

    Charmed thing to drift along the narrow lanes
    Where some dear door flies open to the rap,
    To sit behind windows of whaling days;
    A lantern in the hall, a chair mayhap
    Some geniused Folger used, to read a log
    Stamped with inked whales, kept blue from boyhood cruise;
    The Swift that wound the yarn, peat from the bog--
    The horn the Town Crier used to cry the news.


41

    Charmed thing to catch a sea-word full of spice,
    To eat of beach plum jelly by the fire,
    To see rag rugs hooked like a sailor’s splice,
    To watch the peats’ blue flicker on the fire;
    To see the rafters carved in sailor-ways,
    Paintings of canvased ships crossing the bars,
    When daring whalers went uncharted ways,
    And laid their course by youth’s adventurous stars.


42

    Along the street in early morning’s glow,
    Down to their boats the Portuguese fishers go;
    And through the cobbled alleys bootéd feet
    Drown the gruff voice as sailors comrades meet.
    Then shawled forms slip down to the baker’s shop,
    The Spanish bell rings in the tower top,
    The placid tradesmen wait the lifted latch,
    And quahog diggers launch for the clamming patch.


43

    But village stir and village matters keep
    Free Masonry too subtle and too deep
    For strangers’ smattering tongue and half-taught eye
    That sees them through a garbled mystery.
    What shall be known of souls that live and love,
    Marry and bear, know joy and agony,
    Under blue circle of an Island sky
    Within the silver ring of sounding sea?


44

    Their quiet dreams take root in resolute ways,
    Their poetry is blown to spurts of flame;
    From their grim grandeur of forgotten days
    Comes many a high and sober-minded name.
    Their character persists where many a door
    Opened its narrow pride to let them roam,
    Their feet stand firm on an unshaken floor,
    Roofed by great roof-trees of New England home.


45

    So to the memory their great names come
    What time they reckoned life and grasped its fact,
    Their splendid hours when their spirits’ dumb,
    Unworded promise became conscious act;
    The Islanders, Nantucketers, their theme
    Endures in a worth that cannot fail,
    Across the country their progressive dream
    Steadily marks the Great New England Trail.


46

    For even now in times of want and war,
    In times of apathy and greed and fear,
    The challenges to spirit skyward soar,
    The core of stalwart things is hidden here;
    The white shoals lift like new creative shore,
    The Sound’s salt breath comes like a stirrup cup,
    Till every wanderer takes his burden up.


47

    So, with it all remote, tranquil, unchanged,
    Untouched in depths of solitude and peace,
    The Island fades away, the shoals are ranged,
    Backward in sliding rank the bluffs decrease;
    Backward they slide, the glittering Sound spreads wide.
    Now is no road to Island paths but foam,
    A long, long water-path twixt us and home.


48

    Yet when we sit in silence at the board
    And shapen silver glitters on the white
    Damask, bubbled with flower and glass and scored
    With sensuous patterns of the candle light,
    One smiles and speaks of ’Sconset Lighthouse flare,
    Of sails like wings tapered upon the Sound,
    Of tossing cross-rip by the bell buoy, where
    The schooners get their ranges outward bound.


49

    There falls a silence until someone tells
    An old wife’s tale; another speaks of bay,
    Another one of canterbury bells,
    And someone else of meadows stacked with hay.
    The kindling smile goes round, the voices muse,
    The light is kind that travels from eye to eye,
    And many lonely Island trampings fuse;
    Along rut roads go many a memory.


50

    With eyes alight we say: “When shall I go
    Where the blue chicory twinkles toward the town,
    Or Bouncing Bet bathes in a rosy snow,
    Or where the night wafts scent across the down;
    When shall I breathe the breath of inshore spins,
    And see the darkling fern of water-flaws,
    And catch the drive of myriad mackerel fins
    Where the furred trawler floats its netted jaws!”


51

    In spite of foppish talk and city form,
    We take the lane and loiter on the crest,
    Speaking in terms of Island sun and storm;
    The marlins’ tarry smell, the breakers’ breast,
    Until across the light and baffling word
    There steals the old sea-wind, and with a thrill
    The stagnant pools of city minds are stirred,
    Incoming tides the vapid channels fill.


52

    But we (who know) speak in no idle way,
    We hold no rendezvous, nor name an hour;
    We make no promise when to go or stay,
    We do not plan to gather fruit or flower;
    We only tell the Image deep within
    Our struggling beings: “Beyond all abodes
    And all the challenging, whether we lose or win,
    Spirit, we two shall take the Island roads!”




SEA-MEASURE.


    All night long the even roll of sea
    Rhythmic and slow
    On silence to whose inner mystery
    No man may go.

    Socrates, Plato, Christ must all have heard
    Walking the lonely beach
    Listening for that hidden inner word
    That they might teach.

    All lonely men the centuries send down
    To master human things
    Must have been strengthened by this monotone
    To evener ponderings.

    Quietly feeling what we feel tonight
    That there is hidden bond
    Between our Deepselves and some infinite
    Deepness beyond.




IN AN OLD BURYING GROUND.


    This is strange heraldry
    The graveyard paints
    For him who best perceives
    Its curious feints.
    Under its leaning stones
    Sailors and parson men
    Titles and beggarmen
    Maidens and crones,
    Mingle their bones.

    They laugh at dreams we weave
    Of equality
    Under the sun
    Yet here it’s done!
    Under the frail grass-spear
    All these are equal here
    None lie alone.

    Greek name and Bible name
    Pagan and prude;
    Under the grass
    Not any class.
    Fine old aristocrat--
    Right near his trimkept plat
    The cobbler’s lass!

    Also I notice near
    Sun shining full and clear
    Violets as blue.
    The man who used to swear
    Sleeping quite calmly there
    Where Quakers do.

    Dreamer and prig and crank;
    Humble and full of swank
    Level they rank
    To us they all seem just
    Handfuls of human dust
    Even and blank.

    And this I’ve come to hold
    One may be quite an old
    Aristocrat;
    But when one comes to die
    Things are Democracy
    And that is that!




CHRISTMAS EVE ON NANTUCKET.


    For half an hour tonight we wander
    Through the streets,
    And see the Christmas trees against the lighted pane;
    And catch child voices raised in glee and hear
    Street singers chanting carols loud and free
    Then a bell tone, and then the far-off sea.

    We turn a corner and we pass a house
    Whence strains of music come,
    “Minuit Chrétians--” They will be singing that in Paris tonight!
    From a side gate a scarlet figure booted, slips with bells
    Jingling; some amateur Santa Claus late for festival.

    Here a bright voiced smiling woman hurries along
    To the dim lighted church, bearing a hemlock wreath
    Made by her hands.
    Upon white panelled doors hang other wreaths
    Woven from ground pine near Wannacomet Pond.
    And scarlet berries blaze
    In window boxes bare of summer flowers
    But now made Holiday.

    Another narrow street, and here the candles shine
    Ranging along the pane in a white row,
    Lovely immaculates of memory.
    And in another window a small figure
    A dainty mandarin poised in Chinoise grace
    Beneath some mistletoe!
    And in one window more an old white head
    Is bent over some early coming gift
    Brought by the letter carrier
    From children far away.
    Late! Yet a few steps further, where the narrow lane
    Turns to the moors. There in December skies
    Tender with Christmas memories of years on years,
    Hangs in its winter white, The Evening Star!




SONG OF THE LIGHTSHIPS.

(Landlubber’s Chantey.)


    When the wolves of wind press hard
    On the wild seas snarling pack,
    And the waves bite the shore
    And the shore bites back;
    When the night’s like a cave
    Full of black things howling
    And the hurricanes rave
    With the whistle buoy yowling.

    There’s a rusty trusty boat that never makes a port,
    There’s a scrubby bold boat that never finds a lee,
    The blunt little lightship,
    The iron clad lightship,
    The weather-wise lightship,
    Anchored out at sea!

    When the storms signal’s set,
    Great Point stuck with masts,
    And the range lights blur
    Through the wicked black blasts
    When the extra anchors drag
    And the bell buoy clangs
    And the jetty rocks swirl
    Under tide rips fangs.

    There’s one little boat that never makes a port
    There’s one tidy ship that never seeks a lee
    The blunt little lightship
    The staunch, able lightship
    The game, snubby lightship
    Anchored out at sea.

    When the night’s very still
    And the moon rides high,
    There’s one strange craft
    Gives a hail and stands by.
    Though the forms on her decks
    Have a look of the dead
    Still they warn of a wreck
    Or a shoal dead ahead.

    _It’s the winter-lost Lightship that never found a lee
    It’s the tide-driven Lightship that never made a port
    It’s the silent-crewed Lightship, the speechless brave Lightship
    The ice-covered Lightship
    Sunk at sea._

    Now when home fires blaze
    And the storm is shut out,
    And the wind and its ways
    Are sea-yarned about;
    When the good glass is lifted
    In the good pipe smoke
    And the good talk has drifted
    From the well worn joke....

    Toast the one little boat that never makes port!
    Sing of the craft that never hunts a lee--
    Drink to the lightships, the lonely crews of lightships
    The lunging, plunging lightships
    Anchored out at sea!




SEPTEMBER NOON.


    Upon the warm brick walls the patterns come,
    Dim moving likenesses of pensive leaves;
    The swallows twitter round the ivied eaves
    Late bees in perilous petunias hum;
    On the moors, amber grape and bloomy plum,
    But here in trim back-yards the apple’s face
    Twinkling with dahlias in some latticed place.

    The stranger’s foot has gone and all the world
    Has settled down to Island ways of peace,
    Where the clouds mid-summer caravans cease
    Soundlessness on the hills is silver-furled!
    Now all faint scents and spice of full increase!
    The scarlet pepper pendant on its bush
    And late corn leaning on the farmland hush.

    Slow wagons trundle with the sea-grass haul,
    The crickets, palaced in the golden rod
    Begin their strumming; the horse-chestnuts fall
    And morning glories on the trellis nod;
    Marigold’s velvet turns to pungent pod.
    A sea of azure girds the shores around;
    The tawny silence mellows till the deep
    Steamboat whistle’s sombre-throated sound
    Wakens the isle from Indian Summer’s sleep
    Then all is bustle and the city’s stir
    Once more has come upon the Islander.




MAIN STREET BY MOONLIGHT.


    The old church clock strikes one, and down the row
    Of ancient houses where the moonlight floods,
    The black tree branches move like wands that throw
    A net of woven loopings flecked with buds.
    The night is still, a silver quiet now
    Transforms the plain old homes whose ancient mood
    Returns; through panelled doorways come and go
    Figures soft shod, in prim calash and hood;
    Here by a lilac bush the little gate
    Supports two figures of sweetheart and beau
    Here by a hedge two others hesitate
    Then join the shadowy thronging too and fro.

    Do you believe that in those rooms upstair
    The newer generation dreams again
    Back to the lives of all these women and men
    Setting them free to haunt the pavements here?
    That youngsters sleeping see sails homeward fare,
    Ships laden with treasure and salt romance;
    The Quakers’ broad brim; Puritans askance?
    That such bold dreaming sets these spirits free
    On this deserted street in moonlit beam
    “Coming alive,” though coming soberly
    And looking on us as figures in =their= dream?

    Hush, with what proud simplicity these figures move
    And live again austerities of grace
    Who used their lives so guardedly--this glove
    The homespun petticoat! this barbe of lace!
    Boots and prunellas on the brick path pace;
    Fair tinted skin, clear eye and honored name
    Come through the panelled doors or garden place.
    The scholars’ reserve, the solid merchants’ fame
    The Friends, the Captains, blooded knight and dame,
    Who to old English gentry backward trace.

    So through the cobbled streets they silently press
    On very gentle errands of their own
    And make no plea, and no proud tale confess
    Nor look aghast at their once simple town
    Yet do they smile, permitting us to guess
    That they prefer their own to our renown....

    Was that the clock just struck ... the street is clear
    The moon rides high, there are no figures here....
    Someone stopped dreaming in this street, my dear!




PSALM OF IMAGINED HUNGER.


    If I were starving in Nantucket I would first
    Go down to the beach and dig for quahaugs;
    Or some scallops.
    Or drop overboard a neat little lobster car,
    Or row to a place where there are wild oysters;
    Then I would hang around the docks at five o’clock
    When the fishermen come in,
    And perhaps get an extra plaicefish
    Or some shark or black fish,
    (Though I shouldn’t like to eat horseshoe crab or squid)
    That failing, I would go out on the moors and snare a pheasant;
    I would catch a rabbit and though I wouldn’t know
       how to cook it, an owl.
    To eat crow, I have heard is not judicious--but how
       about marsh-hawk?
    If it were August I would get Irish moss out of the sea,
    And flavor it with cranberries.
    I would then go crabbing near Our Island Home;
    If it were July I should live in the blueberry patches
    And find black berries, (you know where!)
    And get strawberries in the old cemetery.
    I would go mushrooming (very prudently) in fields near Thorn Lots.
    I would go beach plumming (very early) on the State Road
    I would get in touch with grape vines near Wauwinet
    And with hazel nuts near ’Sconset
    And dig for swamp root out near Madaket.
    Elder berry would be a last resort!
    I would hang over the fences of a certain yard in Hussey Street
    To see if grapes and pears would come to me.
    Or I would interrupt tea-parties on Pleasant Street
    Boldly walking in and asking for apples.
    Of course I would weed the potato patch of anyone that asked me to
    For two potatoes.
    I would help with the melons and do what I could
       for corn and pumpkins;
    Peaches and cherries I would pluck on shares
    But if all these things failed I would go to a little house,
    Where they always know what I mean
    And ask for food!




THE MOON-CANOE.


    Where evening tides creep dark and blue,
    I launch my little moon-canoe.

    I leave the planet harbor light,
    And lay my course along the Night.

    I paddle down the Milky Way
    Where phospher sky weeds gleam and spray,

    And pluck what starry branches grow
    Along its winding overflow.

    I swing my shallop out mid dream
    Where tides of summer evening stream;

    And carried on this sound so wide,
    Still on and on and on I glide,

    Harking, along the Western bar
    The bell buoy of a swinging star.

    My meteor anchor will, I ween,
    Hold in this dark of depth unseen;

    The dew, my silver lead and line
    Doth sound me shallows of star shine;

    And now and then I reef the veil
    Of fog that serves me for a sail.

    When, bold, I make the Western lee,
    Old pilot shadows signal me;

    And tacking windward come a fleet
    Of clouds, with ghostly spar and sheet.

    I follow them and disembark,
    And moor my boat beyond the Dark.




DEPRECATION.


    While mending nets I made the songs I knew,
    Hummed them for sake of humming, not for singing;
    But as I crooned, the bell-buoy crooned them too,
    The blacksmith had them on his anvil ringing,
    And the gulls carried them on clearcut winging....

    Yet, if their ragged form the world regrets,
    Do you explain.... “But, she was mending nets!”
